hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery here with
another China history podcast first
episode of 2013 I'm back after a break
in the action today we're going to
continue on with our history of Hong
Kong overview part 8 Hong Kong is now
liberated from the Japanese it's a new
beginning there other than inflation
shortage of hard currency unemployment
looting abysmal health and hygiene
conditions insufficient housing
intimidation from triads and 80 percent
of the Hong Kong people being
malnourished other than all that the
place was still standing and ready to
make a quick and miraculous comeback
after eight months of military
administration beginning with Cecil
Harcourt in August 1945
Sir Mark young returned to Hong Kong
landing at Queen's pair on May Day 1946
to restore civilian administration and
begin picking up the pieces for those
eight months prior to Young's arrival
Hong Kong had been run by the colonial
secretary David Mercer McDougald who
hailed from Perth in Scotland he had
quite an interesting life at the Battle
of Hongkong he made daring escape from
certain death at the hands of the
Japanese he made a break with a bunch of
fellow Intel officers and went on to
make it to Chongqing where the
nationalist government had reconstituted
itself MacDougall later travelled the
Burma Road and worked in Burma until the
end of the war MacDougall was on hand
when Harcourts accepted the surrender
from the Japanese and he served
excellently in the interim until
governor Jung was able to sit behind his
desk again in the governor's mansion it
was a new age in Hong Kong first of all
the British had lost a massive amount of
prestige in the eyes of the Hong Kong
people when they were so quickly
overwhelmed by the Japanese in 1941 the
British of all people when they sailed
into Hong Kong themselves a century
before who
could have ever thought in a million
years these guys could be beat that they
fell so quickly and because the
suffering of the people of Hong Kong
under the Japanese was so terrible it
all reflected badly on Great Britain in
general and British rule of Hong Kong in
particular but an amazing thing happened
right after the war ended and right
after the British sort of reasserted
themselves the economy began to come
back once the monetary and banking
systems were reassembled it had an
instant impact on Hong Kong's economy
and finances this was due in part by the
work carried out by the Hong Kong
Shanghai Bank who were instrumental in
restoring the Hong Kong currency which
was refloated at 16 Hong Kong dollars to
the British pound sterling while the
rest of the world
well not the United States so much tried
to stage some sort of a comeback from
the destruction of World War 2 Hong Kong
had no such trouble considerable damage
had been done during the Warriors but
maybe because it's such a small place
like Singapore it was easier to bounce
back a year after the Japanese had been
kicked out the economy was booming as
for the Japanese in Hong Kong after the
war the war crimes trial sentenced to
death 21 of the worst offenders 85 were
given lengthy prison sentences 14 others
were acquitted and many others escaped
any kind of prosecution as I mentioned
last episode Samar Keung tried to take
the bull by the horns and came up with a
plan that called for more directly
elected legislators his plan called for
the Hong Kong government at least the
Legislative Park to be more democratic
and allow the Hong Kong people meaning
the Hong Kong Chinese people to have
more of a say in who was elected to the
government's highest offices as I said
this didn't go down too well it's simply
couldn't get enough traction and the
halls of power where it mattered it was
a classic case of quiet bureaucratic
resistance
and behind-the-scenes discussions in the
end it was believed the local Hong Kong
Chinese no matter what we're always
gonna side with China there was simply
no way to stop it that's where all the
Hong Kong Chinese came from
therefore it was considered highly risky
to give power to the people
what would happen to the current system
so it never happened the British knew
they'd be marginalised at the first
opportunity they saw no need to share
this power yet
Gunnar young left about a year after his
return in May 1947 he was gone and the
next governor of Hong Kong was Sir
Alexander Grantham he would stay for ten
years and be the one to oversee this
post-war transformation taking place no
streets or parks named after him that I
know of all of there is a Grantham
hospital as for the British in Hong Kong
it was never the same again those old
traditional colonial attitudes that had
been reluctantly accepted for a hundred
years
suddenly weren't so acceptable anymore
one of the first things to go was the
peak ordinances that prohibited Chinese
from buying property on the peak it was
a new world that emerged from the world
war two years and they were simply no
going back to the pre-war society and as
far as Hong Kong was concerned this was
especially so so where doors were closed
to Chinese and commerce and government
administration suddenly they were flung
wide open now up until World War two
Hong Kong's role in the big picture of
global trade was as a trading entrepot
the way it worked was China made Goods
exited the country via any number of
ports stretching from Dalian to
Guangzhou Hong Kong was just one of
these many ports because Guangdong
Province had always been such a leading
powerhouse of manufacturing in China
Hong Kong enjoyed a particular advantage
being located adjacent to such an
mence manufacturing center this is what
initially made Hong Kong this trading
buying and selling merchandise natural
resources foodstuffs you name it these
Hong Kong trading companies from
Jardine's down to the smallest people
gongfu
bought these goods from China that were
made or grown there and sold this stuff
to importers from other countries these
Hong Kong traders also would import
stuff themselves that they knew China
needed and they exported to China always
acting as middlemen less than 30 percent
of Hong Kong's exports to the world were
actually made there now this dynamic was
all about to change
as you may recall from the previous
episode amidst all the chaos going on in
China with the KMT the Communists
fighting each other
millions getting caught up in the
carnage then with a Japanese invaded a
lot of China's more entrepreneurial and
ambitious factory men pulled up stakes
in China and moved Lock Stock and for
Smoking Barrels to Hong Kong and this
was how Hong Kong began to take off as a
manufacturing center no longer would
hong kong be merely an untrue PO filled
the trading companies buying and selling
now stuff was being made in Hong Kong in
factories scattered all over from
Aberdeen to the New Territories textiles
garments housewares silk flowers watches
you name it
made in Hong Kong was now throwing its
hat in the ring and with these factories
being operated inside the territory now
these men running them were in charge of
their own destiny and no longer subject
to a myriad of supply chain issues
caused by one calamity or another in
China so with the influx of all these
factory bosses escaping China and
fleeing to Hong Kong where it was safer
and where you had unique opportunities
he had the beginnings of the soon
ubiquitous made in Hong Kong label
this establishment of a manufacturing
base is going to propel Hongkong into
the top ranks of global export
powerhouses it was these years
also known as the Grantham era the late
40s and into the 50s that Hong Kong saw
a particularly massive surge of refugees
coming from Shanghai they concentrated
themselves in the North Point area west
of tai koo shing and east of Causeway
Bay these to call this area Shanghai or
little Shanghai because there were so
many of them stir run run Shaw and his
family who we featured in CHP episode 49
he was part of this exodus from Shanghai
at this time YK pas the great shipping
magnate and philanthropist who we will
be featuring soon as a topic on this
China history podcast he too came at
this time who else see Seelye the
grandfather of Hong Kong's
entire textile industry brand-new
spinning equipment that he had purchased
from America with all the chaos of the
civil war raging in 1946 and an
inability to obtain an import license
for his equipment from Chiang kai-shek's
government he couldn't get the equipment
past China customs in Shanghai so it
turned out to be a blessing in disguise
especially for Hong Kong CC Lee had the
machines shipped to Hong Kong instead
and set up the factory there that laid
the foundation for the whole textile
industry in Hong Kong and the other
Shanghainese textile magnets of the late
forties who fled China for greener
pastures in Hong Kong they then built on
this foundation laid by CC Lee after
Shanghai was taken by the PLA in May of
1949 the city abruptly went into sort of
a four-decade state of hibernation the
bad old days of the 1920s and 30s
Shanghai were gone for good that
lifestyle that way of life that society
was plowed under and this wasn't just
bad for gangsters pimps and everyone
volved and gambling and skin trade plain
old hardworking honest businessman -
they know a bad thing when they saw
these Shanghai capitalists pecked up all
their machines technology and anything
they could carry and off to Hong Kong
they went and this provided the kindle
wood to light the bonfire that would
make Hong Kong an industrial and
manufacturing world powerhouse and you
surely remember from episode CHP 61
covering the first 12 months of the PRC
almost as soon as the Communist set
themselves up in China the Korean War
broke out this would ultimately lead to
a us-led blockade that spelled the end
of Hong Kong as a window to the outside
world for China the place had been
sealed shut and there was going to be no
way to carry out any trade with China in
1949 not everyone believed in the
Communist dream for a new China so many
people in China bailed and it was to
Hong Kong that they came most of them
becoming the working poor who were part
of the made in Hong Kong miracle
happening in all these industrial
estates it wasn't just these
entrepreneurs who made things happen
it was the formula of the manufacturers
and the bottomless pool of cheap but
skilled and hardworking labour pouring
in from China in those bad old days
right after the war and into the 1950s
those factories in Hong Kong were total
sweatshops of the worst kind there were
no worse than those in England during
the industrial revolution cheap labor
poured in regularly there was never any
shortage of asses to sit on stools 18
hours a day at mill to make any number
of household items for export
polystyrene won't get invented to the
late 50s so the toy business hasn't
taken off yet that'll come later and of
course it's toys perhaps more than
anything else that Hong Kong made a
worldwide name for themselves an
industry there was plenty of concern in
49 that Chairman Mao was going to seize
Hong Kong back this was one of the fares
of the day
PLA troops were down there and certainly
if they wanted to could have crossed the
border at La Wu and just waltzed in just
like Japanese had done in December of
1941 his tents as it got sometimes
nothing ever happened ever actually the
PLA never needed to invade Hong Kong in
order to take it over nonetheless in
December 1948 the British Foreign Office
predicting an inevitable victory by the
communists in China said that living in
Hong Kong would be comparable to living
on the edge of a volcano
since the opium wars the uneasy
relationship between Hong Kong and China
had always been one of mutual benefit
regardless of the historical baggage
having hong kong was actually much
better than not having hong kong not
only was this true from a government and
diplomatic standpoint but also for the
common people as well it wasn't just the
entrepreneurial class and workers who
fled to Hong Kong who prospered the
other less mentioned beneficiaries of
Hong Kong were the relatives of those
who had gone to live in Hong Kong these
hard-working industrious common folk who
came to Hong Kong became a godsend
to their China relatives back in the old
country
who not only received money from them
but more importantly things that were
unobtainable in the PRC after 1949 and
into the 50s and 60s if you had a
relative in Hong Kong you were
considered lucky by March of 1950
Hongkong population was around two
million three hundred sixty thousand the
civil war was over the state of affairs
with the KMT fleeing to Taiwan was just
in its infancy while the violence and
fighting may have stopped the civil war
continued and what Berlin became for the
Allies and the Soviets
that's what Hong Kong became between the
Nationalists and Taiwan and the
Communists on the mainland secret agents
were all over the place
even the CIA having hongkong to operate
in right on the border with the PRC who
back then was our archenemy this was a
bonanza as far as intelligence was
concerned not many people know this but
the US government especially the CIA of
the US military
they really lead on the British you know
as far as Hong Kong was concerned the
newly improved brash post-war American
frame of mind was really making itself
heard they lean hard on governor
Grantham's you know as far as what they
wanted him to do we know whatever
American interests were concerned which
wasn't just about everything so the
British government in Hong Kong always
had the Americans leaning hard on them
and of course the British wanted to show
they were onboard with everything the
Americans want it but at the same time
they had to tell their American partners
hey man I got a deal with these guys to
the north you know I knew this for you
that I'm gonna catch heat from Chairman
Mao so they really walked a tightrope
trying to please and manage the
diplomacy of both the US and China for
example in 1957 after all this talk had
been going around the highest levels in
Great Britain about giving the PRC a
seat at the United Nations
Eisenhower cut a deal with you know
Selden Lloyd British Foreign Secretary
at the time which basically said we'll
lend a helping hand to Hong Kong with
our Far East military might and sure
Hong Kong's security in you Great
Britain you lay off any of this crazy
talk about giving Chairman Mao a seat at
the UN then when they shook hands on
this so stuff like this happen all
throughout the 50s and into the 60s
governor Grantham always had to listen
to the Chinese propaganda that you know
accused the British of allowing the
American imperialists to use Hong Kong
as a base from which to spy on China and
of course the Brits being the Stooges of
the Americans I guess you know British
were rightfully freaking out that Mao
had prevailed on the mainland the USG
wanted to make sure they could get the
full benefit of Hong Kong strategic
location in the south of China so close
to one of China's largest cities
Guangzhou this is going to cause all
kinds of conflicts and kerfuffles like
you can't imagine between the United
States and Great Britain man the shoe
was on the other foot now 118 years
before Britain was the colonial master
of the US and now in the 1950s the
Americans were bossing the British
around under Grantham a whole slew of
changes happened as I said the doors
were flung open for positions in the
government administration civil service
the government carried out a vigorous
policy of local recruitment Grantham had
to face the problem of all the refugees
who flooded into hong kong particularly
right after the fall of canteen or
guangzhou in october 1949 after that
happened there were an extra 700,000
mouths to feed in hong kong and where
were all these people gonna live I'll
tell you where if they didn't have any
money or rich relatives to look after
them
these newly arrived Chinese lived in
these shanty towns in the Hills the open
spaces wherever they could find a
hundred square feet to make their own
Christmas Day 1953 bad day for the
residents living in the squatter
villages and shek Kip may 53,000 people
were left homeless after a fire raged
through one of the bigger shanty towns
there the fire killed some but not many
but 53,000 homeless and the cold wet
December of hong kong was a major
headache for the hong kong government
not to mention all those who lived
through the tragedy
how did Grantham deal with this problem
this is where the whole idea of the
housing estates began thus was born the
first-ever housing estate the shek
Katmai estate today in 2013 check it
mega state consists of 26 apartment
blocks of seven thousand three hundred
and sixty three units ranging in size
from about 110 to 550 square feet this
was Hong Kong
is first government housing estate now
mind you when they first went up many
outsiders who saw them considered these
apartments glorified prison cells you
know they weren't so pretty back then
and were meant to serve a kind of
utilitarian purpose more than anything
else what people got was as one observer
put it quote a concrete box allowing 24
square feet ahead in a seven story
structure with no lifts no windows but
wooden shutters no water but access to
communal kitchens and bathrooms
if this sounds dreadful it was but such
was the alternative that people fought
to get into the new blocks where you had
your own place legally and it would not
burn down unquote this wasn't a bad idea
taking all this sprawl over so much land
and stacking it up into you know these
high-rises this opened up lots of good
land for developers and wherever land
developers went there was plenty of
revenue generated for the government
coffers win-win the Hong Kong government
aggressively embarked on social welfare
schemes and in education they did this
through the auspices of existing social
welfare agencies of course many of the
churches and other religious
institutions were called upon by the
government to assist in the organizing
and execution of some services so these
resettlement projects of which these
massive housing estates for the
centerpiece brought a degree of comfort
and integration into Hong Kong society
for hundreds of thousands of newly
arrived Chinese sir Patrick Abercrombie
the man called upon to lead the charge
for the post-war urban planning in
London delivered a report upon his visit
to Hong Kong in 1947 the bullet points
Abercrombie gave as far as his
recommendations for Hong Kong or to pay
attention to zoning build more wide open
spaces remove traces of the middle
terry from central and last but not
least Abercrombie suggested to build
some sort of a cross harbor tunnel and
anyone familiar with Hong Kong today can
see all of these proposals from
Abercrombie were taken to heart today
there are three cross Harbor tunnels for
cars and for the red and purple lines of
the MTR subway system the lines to the
airport at lantau and no one can
complain that there are not enough parks
and wide open spaces to escape the
sprawl and the overcrowding into the
1950s and 60s the working poor toiled
away the hours of these factories it
became such a common fact of life to be
involved in this world you know most of
these factories were not these huge
Orwellian metropolis type giant
factories with assembly lines with a
thousand workers the overwhelming
majority of these Hong Kong factories
were small operations employing 50 to
100 workers many were even smaller and
it wasn't just the workers who got in on
the game just like you have in China
today
back in the 1950s 60s in Hong Kong there
developed an entire layer of
subcontractors these subcontractors
didn't speak a word of English and could
never dream of selling anything to
anyone who didn't speak Cantonese their
world was to supply semi-finished parts
and piece work to a much bigger Factory
who you know couldn't be bothered with
such labor-intensive handwork some
Factory who made ladies blouses for
example might have an order for some
blouse with some fancy ribbon and bow
pinned to it or some embellishment maybe
for this factory guy to take the time to
tie these ribbons might slow him down or
perhaps it was some staff in the
production that required a particular
higher degree of hand labor the factory
might go to some guy he knows maybe a
relative maybe someone introduced to him
and this guy specializes in tying
ribbons and bows he will handle the set
his sweatshop somewhere and when he's
done he'll deliver the semi finished
goods to the factory who will take this
and
you know finish off the blouse and then
away it goes made in Hong Kong just like
now
nobody was regulating or checking up on
these thousands and thousands of
thousands of small subcontractors this
is where whole Hong Kong families would
get in on the game not only what mom and
pop do this kind of stuff that their day
jobs at the factory it was entirely
common to bring work home and all the
able-bodied kids in the family grandma
too if she could would help out this was
pure unadulterated child labor but this
is what people in Hong Kong did in the
fifties and sixties and having the whole
family helping out was just the thing
that was done in that culture when the
chips were down everyone stuck together
and whether the hardship together and if
it meant brothers and sisters ten years
old sitting around the apartment after
dinner tying bows gluing rhinestones
folding instruction sheets counting tiny
things and putting them in small boxes
whatever the family had to survive and
this was just one way they did it and
this whole network that evolved the
factories and subcontractors providing
that solid fuel that powered the rocket
they had led to so much of the
prosperity in Hong Kong and made the
place a force to reckon with one of the
up shots of this however was that the
labor movement remained weak and
toothless and all the people who fought
for workers rights safety pay benefits
was such an endless supply of labor
flowing in from China all the time
always willing to work for peanuts
the labor movement always faced an
uphill struggle well by 1971 bear in
mind the Hong Kong factory worker was
ranked second in Asia as far as standard
of living went Hong Kong society was no
longer dominated by the British tycoons
and bankers and government officials a
combination of Hong Kong's middle class
or upper middle class however you want
to call it along with all those rich
Chinese industrialists were the anchors
of Hong Kong industry combined to become
a rather formidable force the days
during the times of all those old
governors bowring robinson mcdonald
kennedy Hennis
those days when the British truly did
lord it over the Chinese in Hong Kong
those days couldn't have been more over
and looked at from the prism of where
Hong Kong was in the 50s and 60s they
seem quite anachronistic besides all
this there was the whole matter of Hong
Kong's relationship with China that is
Britain's relationship with China for
Britain in the 1950s there was no more
dog Wong or Guangxu Emperor to deal with
now it was Chairman Mao on a dragon
throne so to speak China wasn't as
powerful as they are today but
nonetheless the British government knew
the old tried-and-true playbook of
propping up a weak and rotting
government and exploiting it for
national gain had to be thrown out
actually Britain knew all this and they
bent over backwards to show the CCP they
meant no harm and had every intention to
be a good neighbor down in the south a
lot of symbolic steps and actions were
taken again you know certain authorities
of power to China regarding sensitive
issues that concerned both Hong Kong and
China Britain was one of the first non
Warsaw Pact nations to recognize the PRC
doing so in February of 1950 the
interesting thing about the relationship
between China and Hong Kong was that
even though the place was a British
colony or territory they were now
calling it trying to consider the matter
of Hong Kong as a domestic matter rather
than a foreign policy matter Hong Kong
had its uses now as it had from the
earliest founding days of the CCP the
Korean War that began in June 1950
created all manners of diplomatic
complications for the British with
respect to Hong Kong the British of
course were part of the UN force
fighting the Chinese and the frozen
Korean Peninsula British diplomats
really had to work overtime during that
time to keep the pot from boiling over
with China until things quieted down in
July 1953 but during the Korean War
period as
said the UN in the US slapped an embargo
on trade with China and Hong Kong being
part of Britain and all they had to
comply also but as I explained as soon
as this embargo yeah that could have
meant curtains for Hong Kong as soon as
it came into force along comes the birth
of Hong Kong Industrial might to rescue
the economy and the people's livelihoods
into the 1960s the progress Hong Kong
made in industry was having a rather
large effect on a Hong Kong society
although workers didn't make what could
be called a living wage a lot of people
were working and the way it was within
the Cantonese family everyone stuck
together and looked out for one another
so even though you weren't bringing in a
big income one always had that familial
safety net under them so you could say
society was doing well for sure it was
more pleasant in Hong Kong than in China
the decade of the 60s opened up with
horrific and deadly famines that came as
a result of the Great Leap Forward this
brought in more refugees who were
escaping for their lives one hundred and
fifty thousand refugees came in 1962
alone Hong Kong's population in the 60s
hovered around 3 million thanks to Sir
run run Shaw the Shaw Brothers and all
the other Hong Kong entertainment moguls
there was plenty to watch on TV and has
provided endless distraction from the
rigors of life Connie Chan was the huge
TV and movie star of the day and all the
rage back in the 60s Hong Kong TV came
into its own during this time most of
you have seen or at least heard of the
book made into a 1960 Hollywood movie
called the world of Suzie Wong this
starred a 42 year old William Holden
together with 21 year old Nancy Kwan
Guangzhou chin Nancy Kwan was born in
Hong Kong to a Chinese father and a
Scottish mother she grew up in Kowloon
Tong and went through all the traumas
of the Japanese occupation of the Civil
War as a young child she had a very
complicated childhood but she had the
looks and the talent and got herself
spotted at the right time this novel by
Richard Mason was a big hit around the
world but the movie besides making Nancy
Kwan a household name back then and for
many years after it did wonders for
boosting Hong Kong's image as an
international swinging hip exotic
location filled with all the wonders of
Chinese culture and of course beautiful
innocent local women just dying to be
swept up by some dashing guy lo
I mean foreigner the Beatles arrived in
Hong Kong
June 8th 1964 there they played two
shows at the Princess Theatre in gym
side joy the Princess Theatre isn't
around anymore it was torn down and
today the site is occupied by the
Miramar Hotel and Nathan and Kimberley
Rhodes the hotel they stayed at isn't
there anymore either they stayed at the
old Hyatt Regency on Nathan which back
in the Beatlemania days was the newly
opened president Hotel the Fab Four
played two shows on June 9th
neither of them sold out because the
ticket price is at 75 Hong Kong dollars
was about a week's pay for the average
working stiff Ringo by the way didn't
make it to Hong Kong as he was sick for
this part of the tour this was the brief
window where Jimmy nickel filled in for
Ringo writing himself into the rock and
roll history books the Cantonese
language press totally panned the
performance and pretty much like
everywhere the Beatles played in Asia
they were considered a corrupting
influence on the youth of the day is a
quick sidebar to this sidebar back in
1964 in order for John Paul George
Jimmy nickel to get to Hong Kong from
London they had to make fueling stops in
Zurich Beirut Karachi Calcutta and
Bangkok there were no nonce
copper's back then writer and James Bond
double-oh-seven creator Ian Fleming he
wrote of Hong Kong in the 1960s that it
was quote the most vivid and exciting
city I have ever seen offering comfort
in a theatrically oriental setting it
was a gay and splendid colony humming
with vitality and progress
knowing that 650 million Communist
Chinese are a few miles away across the
frontier seems only to add zest to the
excitement at all levels of life in the
colony and from the governor down if
there is an underlying tension there are
certainly no dismay obviously China
could take Hong Kong by a snap of its
giant fingers but China has shown no
signs of wishing to do so whatever the
future holds there was no sign that a
sinister doom fraud countdown is in
progress
unquote Fleming here is referring to the
countdown to July 1st 1997 when the
lease on the New Territories would
expire things were all peaceful and rosy
in Hong Kong in the 1960s there were
riots in 1966 that covered three days of
protests it all began when the Hong Kong
government proposed raising fears on the
star ferry 25% from 20 cents to 25 cents
back then the star ferry was the only
way to get from Kowloon to Hong Kong
Island Hong Kong was still seven years
away from opening up the first cross
harbour tunnel which took you from Hong
Kong to Causeway Bay
I guess the theme of today's China
history podcast episode is the rise and
dominance of Hong Kong industrial might
and what it meant for Hong Kong you see
this is all linked together with the
1966 riots not to be confused with the
bigger and more famous 1967 riots which
we'll get to next time as Hong Kong
manufacturing grew
it brought in all kinds of money into
the territory the problem was that
although Hong Kong was booming workers
wages were remaining flat do you know
the problem too much labor too many Hong
Kong people already and more arriving
everyday from China so there was never a
moment like you have today in China
where suddenly labor wasn't plentiful
enough in China today it's not so easy
to find workers to keep these factories
humming because of this and along with
government policy wages are going up
like crazy
well no such luck for Hong Kong's
workers in the 1960s they still work for
the same peanuts as always it seemed ok
in the 1950s after all those were such
extraordinary times the blowback from
the Chinese Civil War the Korean War the
persecution of the intellectuals and
capitalists the Great Leap Forward the
famine but now it was the 1960s man
groovy and the common Hong Kong workers
were seeing all these same changes as
everyone else and all these nice things
in life and they didn't have no Hong
Kong $75.00 go see the Beatles at the
Princess Theatre this class of society
was barely making ends meet and not
getting their meager rations of the Hong
Kong economic and industrial America
over half a million squatters we're
still living on the hillsides of Kowloon
this and all the income disparity lousy
working conditions zero political
representation and disgust at the
government corruption there already was
this slow boil of discontent already
simmering so when word got out as it
always did in Hong Kong that people who
use the star ferry to get to work had to
face a 25% increase they went crazy
25% increase coming and going what death
actually the government wanted to raise
it even higher so April 4th 1966 10
years later on this very date you'll see
the first tnmn
which we discussed before a guy named so
song or Sushil Jang in Mandarin he got
the ball rolling when he sent his ass
down at the star ferry terminal on the
central side and began a hunger strike
he famously wore a vest that said hey
OLC join the hunger strike to block the
fare increase now for those who are not
familiar with Hong Kong the star ferry
terminal and central in the old days
before the days of the IFC an exchange
Square was about this public of a place
as you could get
it was a kin to Grand Central Station in
New York City you know a lot of people
coming and going at all hours of the day
so mr. so got maximum value for his
protest and I guess the timing was right
in 1966 people by that time who were
watching all this prosperity going on
right before their eyes finally reached
a point where they had had enough and
the idea of protesting this fare
increase caught fire quickly Hale LC
that was LC Elliott they were talking
about those who lived in Hong Kong in
the 80s and 90s remember her as LC - why
was mr. so wearing this vest with the
words Hale LC on it mrs. Elliott - who
may have preface this by saying was
ranked by a 1993 South China Morning
Post poll as Hong Kong's most widely
admired personality she was a nice old
lady from Newcastle who moved to Hong
Kong in 1951 at the age of 38 and pretty
much else he fought for the common man
you know one of those types the bane of
the establishment always fighting for
the fair deal for the common folk for
decades until she retired from public
service lc2 fought against government
corruption against the Triads and for
fair treatment of workers and against
colonialism she set up a school for
children living in the shanty towns of
Guangdong in 1954 and served as the
principal this is the kind of work she
did nothing flashy just trying to help
the poor she drifted into politics and
when the whole
star fairy rate increase thing came up
she fought against it she went out into
the hood and drummed up 20,000
signatures on a petition against the
fare increase the government felt what
five cents what's the big deal in LC -
well back then she was still Elsie
Elliott she knew this was a big deal and
meant 50 cents extra a week out of the
pockets of the people who lived a life
where every penny counted she even flew
to London to complain when the vote came
up in government only Elsie voted
against it the lone dissenter that's why
mr. so was hailing Elsie so 1966 riots
had happened real fast mr. so in a
familiar scene we've read about for so
many decades was of course arrested and
sentenced which led to more outbreaks of
protests April 6 right there on Nathan
Road riots broke out protesters threw
rocks at buses and vehicles were set
alight the police station in Yau Ma Tei
was attacked by a mob this led to the
usual police show of force complete with
tear gas and everything
the mob grew into the night as you know
people out for a stroll on Nathan Road
exiting the movie theaters when they let
out they joined in to show their
disapproval of this fare increase they
called in the army to deal with this he
had uniformed soldiers with fixed
bayonets on their rifles right there on
the streets of Jim saw joy Jordan Yama
day and Mongkok curfews were called for
the next day and after the usual
suspects were all rounded up 669 in all
the curfew was lifted on April 10th and
this tempest in a teapot simmered down
in the end 258 protesters received
prison sentences of up to two years and
several million dollars damage was done
in the mayhem they despite all the
protests and the riots that followed and
despite Elsie Elliot twos best efforts
the fare increase went through anyway
and that was that
Elsie also got herself
censured by the government for provoking
the whole incident and from that point
on viewed as a classic political
troublemaker today as I speak I believe
taking the Star Ferry across Hong Kong
harbour in first class will set you back
$2.50 Hong Kong and $2 on the lower deck
which at 32 cents and 25 cents USD is
one of the many true bargains left in
this world
so Hong Kong dodged a bullet with this
riot lasted less than a week it was
contained rather quickly next time when
we pick up with part 9 of this Hong Kong
history overview we'll look at the 1966
riots more famous brother the 1967 riots
that was an incident that anyone born
say 1960 or later in Hong Kong might
remember quite vividly so that will be
saved for next time and once we've
finished with the 67 riots assigned to
the 70s 80s and we'll finish off in 1997
like I said for now as usual this is
your kind and humble narrator Laszlo
Montgomery coming to you from very cold
but sunny Claremont California here on
the easternmost edge of Los Angeles
County we're here for you each and every
ten days to two weeks or sometimes
longer with a dose of Chinese history
and culture and so far still a free
service of the China history podcast com
I thank you all for listening and if I
was able to pique your interest enough
then I hope we'll see you next week for
perhaps another exciting episode of the
China history podcast